# BMIN503/EPID600 Final Project

# BMIN503/EPID600 Final Project

Link to my final project: https://github.com/ntaranto/BMIN503_Final_Project

After treatment for early stage breast cancer, recurrence remains a problem in up to 30% of individuals, in spite of these patients completing definitive treatment with curative intent (including surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy/endocrine therapy) for their early stage breast cancer. It remains unclear who will experience disease recurrence and who will not, and whether we can identify biomarkers such as disseminated/dormant tumor cells (DTCs) or circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) as risk factors for recurrence. Historically, in retrospective, observational studies, these markers of minimal residual disease (MRD) have demonstrated strong associations with recurrence and disease relapse. But it remains unclear how these associations persist with modern treatment paradigms, what the time course of positivity, and what clinical risk factors put patients at greatest risk for having DTC or ctDNA positivity and subsequent relapse--as well as which most strongly predict biomarker positivity.

Optimizing detection, intervention and surveillance for MRD after breast cancer treatment utilizing highly sensitive, real-time assays to identify patients with dormant tumor cells and those undergoing tumor reactivation in-transit to recurrence would fundamentally change the paradigm of breast cancer follow up from one of “watchful waiting” to a proactive approach that could enable ongoing monitoring for subclinical disease and suppression or eradication of cells that could potentially metastasize. Ultimately, an approach using MRD biomarkers could provide reassurance to patients with definitively negative MRD testing that they are unlikely to experience a relapse, could enable detection and treatment strategies for those in whom MRD is detectable and, ultimately, prevent recurrence and subsequent death from metastatic breast cancer while preserving quality of life for millions of breast cancer survivors around the world.

In the SURMOUNT study, we have followed patients who have undergone definitive treatment for their early stage breast cancer for recurrence, and also obtained bone marrow and peripheral blood assessment, looking for disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) in the bone marrow by immunohistochemistry (DTC-IHC) and circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in the blood. In this study, we are following patients over multiple years after their breast cancer for these markers and clinically following them for relapse and survival events. The goal of this study is to assess the relationship between ongoing surveillance for MRD (utilizing standard DTC-IHC and ctDNA by a tumor-informed assay) and recurrence, assess the trajectory of MRD over time and risk factors for DTC and ctDNA positivity, optimize the type and number of tests needed to predict recurrence, and further evaluate the long-term impact of therapeutic interventions aimed at eliminating DTCs.

In this specific analysis, we will look at the clinical predictors of ctDNA and DTC positivity to try to understand the strongest drivers of MRD in the population of patients with high-risk early breast breast cancer who have finished definitive treatment. We will do so by looking at the clinical characteristics, DTC and ctDNA assessment, and clinical follow-up for the cohort of patients enrolled onto the SURMOUNT (Surveillance Markers of Utility for Recurrence after (Neo)adjuvant Therapy for Breast Cancer) study between 2016 and 2021 who had ctDNA assessment performed.

For this analysis, I have spoken with Dr. Nicholas Seewald, my biostatistical mentor, and Dr. Angela DeMichele, my epidemiology mentor and a breast oncologist with expertise in the biomarkers of recurrence (and the PI on the SURMOUNT study). Dr. Seewald has been critical to thinking about the approach to multivariable analysis to assess the clinical predictors of ctDNA and DTC positivity as well as survival analyses to understand the associations between biomarker positivity and relapse. Dr. Demichele has been instrumental in the development of the SURMOUNT study design, designing the analysis of this initial surveillance cohort, and thinking about clinical predictors of positivity and the biomarkers of breast cancer recurrence and dormance more broadly.
